Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, I think all of us realize that the strength
of the Western nations of Europe and the United States and Canada offer the greatest hope
and assurance for peace if we can stand together and work together, all one for all and all
for one, militarily, economically and politically.
So that in 1940, man, the North Atlantic Treaty organization was created.
And after this time, we have gotten along, although we've had many differences between the
15 nations, composing what we call NATO.
Many of us have been interested for a long, long time in having a citizens' commission
to work as a, with other commissions of other NATO nations, a limited number to meet and
to continue to discuss ways and means of improving the techniques and the operations and
the unity of our North Atlantic Treaty organization.
And last fall, this resolution was passed by the Congress of the United States after
quite an effort.
Then in March of this year, the United States Commission was created consisting of 20
members.
Today, we're very honored in having with us the co-chair, one of the United States
Citizens Commission on NATO.
There men that you will know well, and it's a great privilege and pleasure to have with
us in the studio, Mr. Will Clayton of Tennessee and Texas, a former great undersecretary of state
and one of the fine and great men of our nation.
Mr. Will is good to have you with us today.
I certainly appreciate it.
And then I'm Mr. Clayton's right is Mr. Christian Herder, a very able well-known governor,
former governor of Massachusetts.
And the Secretary of State who served with great distinction and merit and honor until we
Democrats took over here recently.
Mr. Will first, we and Tennessee have always been tremendously fond of you because you grew
up, I believe, Jackson Tennessee.
Thank you, I did.
I was re-adding Jackson left there when I was 15 years old when I have a very warm spot
in my heart for Tennessee.
Yes, sir.
And then after you became the head of Anderson Clayton Company, one of the greatest company
in the world, and you were here in government.
You found a place called Lookout Mountain and you built a home there and lived there for
a number of years, didn't you?
Yes.
We had a summer home there and lived there for 20 summers, I think.
Or I can certify it because it's a wonderful place to spend the summer.
We have a between the bank and insurance company and I see and I have a summer house up there
ourselves.
Well, Mr. Herdur, tell us about the work of the United States Citizens Commission and
what is the trouble with NATO at the present time?
What are we aiming at?
Well, you're right for a pretty wide field.
Well, you're not taking a little part.
LTV commissioners, you know, only got organized short and moderate deployment.
In recent weeks, various members of the commission, including Rotate and myself, have been traveling
to different countries.
In order to stimulate the creation of similar committees in the NATO countries, so that
in time we could organize the type of convention that was envisaged in the resolution.
I think that that is progressing, but it's a slow process because in the good many cases
it's not entirely clear just how the committee should be set up.
And we have set a rather unusual precedent that others can't necessarily with some of
their parliamentary restrictions for their own exactly the same detail.
In to further work of the commissioners concerned, I agree entirely with the both right words
that you said.
But perhaps the most important thing today, the first priority from the point of view of
the free world is to make certain that the free nations of the world as well as a large
measure by the United Community should be upending from a military political and economic
point of view.
In those close unit days, it's possible to get.
I have been different as you know.
I think that it's so well known that I'm well and large going to the detail of the
difficulty, but I think that among the free nations, this is a characteristic of free
people that they do have differences.
That's what makes us strong, I guess, with the other names.
And I think that the responsibility that we have created in the members of our commission
have is to examine other difficulties and to explore, as the resolution says, ways in
which this group of the free world can strengthen the democratic free world in the various
aspects that have been laid out particularly in the economic and the political field.
Mr. Will, we use the think of NATO as a military alliance.
And I know that you have another idea about an important part of NATO.
Tell us about the other parts, the political and the economic.
Well, I'm particularly interested in Article II of the NATO agreement, which provides
that the members of NATO, which are now 15 countries, shall cooperate together from the
point of view, strengthening the economic ties and cooperate in an economic sense as well
as a military sense.
And that Article II has not been put into operation to the extent that I think it should be.
And we are hoping that we may be able to make some suggestions as a result of the deliberations
of this United States Citizens Commission on NATO that will contribute to that end.
Well, Chris and Harry said that you and he had been together to a number of nations.
How have you been, Mr. Will?
We visited London and then bond and then Rome and then Paris, the poor nations.
And Mr. Harterson has been to Canada.
And did you find what kind of reaction did you find among the people and the nations that
you went to?
We found a warm reception in all of those countries.
And a desire to cooperate with us in every possible way.
The, of course, this commission, setting up with this commission is rather a new thing
in our country.
And it certainly is new in that country that there should be a Citizens Commission that would
report to together one but would have no right to commit to government in any way.
Well, there is, I think, the commission we have is probably one of a very few of its
type.
But I have had the feeling that with a wise man, dedicated man like yourselves, and I want
to say that I have never known a commission that had a blurr.
May and while you do have one fine woman on the commission too, we received no compensation
who has a matter of good for the world and for the country are giving us a time, thought
and brains and influence toward this great effort.
Kristen, Mr. Clayton said you had been up to Canada.
What did the Canadians do about it?
Well, the Canadians, I saw members of the government as well as the various members of the
parliamentary bodies who were principally concerned many of them, the NATO parliamentarians.
And they were going to work out a method of representation to set up a commission.
The government interested, as you know, in Canada at the moment, there is a good deal
of discussion going on because of the influence at least in some of Mr. MacMillan statements
that the British are going to join the common market.
Canada naturally wondering what one of the commonwealth countries is, what is going to become
of the health special privileges as it comes in the country and the British market.
So it's a pretty hot subject.
But I think that the Canadians, all of those that I spoke to, feel about the exploration
which commissions of this kind might make together might be very helpful and very useful.
But I would like to know how about Mr. Diffinbacker, the Prime Minister of Canada.
He's been very much interested in that, hasn't he?
Yes, he's been very much interested, but he is very much concerned about this move for
the British at the moment.
And he is asked for a meeting of the Prime Ministers of all the commonwealth countries to discuss
it.
I don't know whether that will come about or not because I noticed that the British are sending
very high ranking ministers to those countries now, to Australia, New Zealand and Canada
to discuss the relation of the commonwealth.
They're also sending one of our commissioners some of their Asiatic members of the commonwealth.
Well, the negative, the NATO parliamentarians in Canada have a meeting and take action
while you were there.
They say they did, they discussed the thing from beginning to end, we've been over now discussing
various phases of it and then the after-evolution favouring it.
I believe that Greece, one of our NATO nations, has already set up a council or a commission
similar to ours, how would they Mr. Will?
Yes, and it's called a Hellenic-Cash Citizens Commission on NATO.
I've always been impressed with the fact that if a military alliance is going to survive,
if we're going to have unity and strength, that we had to have some better means of political
consultation, not that we follow on another's political policy in every case, but we all
at least each know what the others doing, like in the case, you were Secretary of State,
I believe.
I will, you Mr. Hearder, when the Suez of Fair came.
I was under Secretary of that time.
You were under Secretary of State.
And the French and British took move, apparently had not been discussed with the United States
all over it, involved the whole world.
Is that part of the things that you will be talking about when you meet with these representatives
of other countries?
Well, one of the problems in NATO that has always arisen have been so-called political
consultation, that is the effort to try to get a common meeting ground and a common policy.
It has improved very, very considerably, but it is not going to be completely satisfactory
in my way of thinking, until our political ties are stronger than they are at the present
time.
And that will be part of the things that you will try to bring about, Mr. Tudor.
That's right.
How do you view the General Western Atlantic picture at the present time, Mr. Will?
I think that it illustrates very strongly the need for some means of bringing the Western,
NATO countries and the OECD countries closer together.
If we are to successfully defend ourselves in America against the monolithic power of the
Soviet Union plus the Chinese, they have a billion people now which is one out of every
three in the world.
And if it ever should get to be two out of three, I think the world has lost its freedom.
Well, I just want to say on my own, ladies and gentlemen, that I think that our great hope
for peace is in the Atlantic community and free people standing together.
I think that Mr. Clayton and Mr. Herder and the others on this commission are rendering
a great public service and trying to bring about ways and means so that we can stand together
well.
We are indebted to them.
It may make the difference between peace and war and the days to come.
So Mr. Will, Clayton, I want to thank you very much for being with us.
Thank you, Mr. Chris.
It is all to nice to be here to come and thank you very much.